Applications 

In this section we consider several applications of the data structure, both the trivial uses and some improvements to the data structure.
Connected components in a graph

This is one of the obvious applications of DSU.

Formally the problem is defined in the following way: Initially we have an empty graph. We have to add vertices and undirected edges, and answer queries of the form (a,b)
- "are the vertices a and b

in the same connected component of the graph?"

Here we can directly apply the data structure, and get a solution that handles an addition of a vertex or an edge and a query in nearly constant time on average.

This application is quite important, because nearly the same problem appears in Kruskal's algorithm for finding a minimum spanning tree. Using DSU we can improve the O(mlogn+n2)
complexity to O(mlogn)

.
Search for connected components in an image

One of the applications of DSU is the following task: there is an image of n×m

pixels. Originally all are white, but then a few black pixels are drawn. You want to determine the size of each white connected component in the final image.

For the solution we simply iterate over all white pixels in the image, for each cell iterate over its four neighbors, and if the neighbor is white call union_sets. Thus we will have a DSU with nm

nodes corresponding to image pixels. The resulting trees in the DSU are the desired connected components.

The problem can also be solved by DFS or BFS, but the method described here has an advantage: it can process the matrix row by row (i.e. to process a row we only need the previous and the current row, and only need a DSU built for the elements of one row) in O(min(n,m))

memory.
Store additional information for each set

DSU allows you to easily store additional information in the sets.

A simple example is the size of the sets: storing the sizes was already described in the Union by size section (the information was stored by the current representative of the set).

In the same way - by storing it at the representative nodes - you can also store any other information about the sets.
Compress jumps along a segment / Painting subarrays offline

One common application of the DSU is the following: There is a set of vertices, and each vertex has an outgoing edge to another vertex. With DSU you can find the end point, to which we get after following all edges from a given starting point, in almost constant time.

A good example of this application is the problem of painting subarrays. We have a segment of length L
, each element initially has the color 0. We have to repaint the subarray [l;r] with the color c for each query (l,r,c)

. At the end we want to find the final color of each cell. We assume that we know all the queries in advance, i.e. the task is offline.

For the solution we can make a DSU, which for each cell stores a link to the next unpainted cell. Thus initially each cell points to itself. After painting one requested repaint of a segment, all cells from that segment will point to the cell after the segment.

Now to solve this problem, we consider the queries in the reverse order: from last to first. This way when we execute a query, we only have to paint exactly the unpainted cells in the subarray [l;r]

. All other cells already contain their final color. To quickly iterate over all unpainted cells, we use the DSU. We find the left-most unpainted cell inside of a segment, repaint it, and with the pointer we move to the next empty cell to the right.

Here we can use the DSU with path compression, but we cannot use union by rank / size (because it is important who becomes the leader after the merge). Therefore the complexity will be O(logn)
per union (which is also quite fast).
